We’d like to begin by thanking Jigsaw/Kaggle for challenging us with a novel data science problem. And congratulations to everyone who made it through to the finish line - this was a marathon, not a sprint!

Summary of our approach:

Diverse pre-trained embeddings (baseline public LB of 0.9877)

Translations as train/test-time augmentation (TTA) (boosted LB from 0.9877 to 0.9880)

Rough-bore pseudo-labelling (PL) (boosted LB from 0.9880 to 0.9885)

Robust CV + stacking framework (boosted LB from 0.9885 to 0.9890)

We didn’t possess prior NLP-specific domain knowledge so our overall strategy was to test standard ML/DL techniques against the problem in a systematic fashion. We were gratified to see general techniques such as TTA and pseudo-labeling work effectively here.

It would be remiss of us to not to mention that our hardware setup facilitated an exhaustive search of the solution space: we had 6 GPUs between the two of us. We had optimized code that allowed us to crunch 8-fold OOF data trained against 1+ million samples (TTA + PL) to convergence in approx. 2 hours per model.

Our approach in detail

1. Diverse pre-trained embeddings

Given that >90% of a model’s complexity resides in the embedding layer, we decided to focus on the embedding layer rather than the post-embedding layers. For the latter, our work-horse was two BiGru layers feeding into two final Dense layers. For the former, we searched the net for available pre-trained word embeddings and settled primarily on the highest-dimensional FastText and Glove embeddings pre-trained against Common Crawl, Wikipedia, and Twitter.

2. Translations as train/test-time augmentation (TTA)

We leveraged Pavel Ostyakov’s idea of machine translations to augment both train and test data sets using French, German, and Spanish translations translated back to English. Given the possibility of information leaks, we made sure to have translations stay on the same side of a train-val split as the original comment. For the predictions, we simply averaged the predicted probabilities of the 4 comments (EN, DE, FR, ES).

This had a dramatic impact on the performance of our models. For example,

Vanilla Bi-GRU model: 0.9862LB
“ (w/ train-time augments): 0.9867 LB
“ (w/ test-time augments): 0.9865 LB
“ (w/ both train/test-time augments): 0.9874 LB
In other words, a single TTA-ed model was beating the majority of teams’ (presumably) ensembled submissions on the public ladder.

We were curious if this technique worked primarily by “fixing” non-English comments - we tested translating the original comments directly into English (which had the side-effect of translating non-English comments) and that resulted in lower performance than our full-form of augmentation.

3. Rough-bore pseudo-labelling (PL)

We tried a number of PL variants - canonical per-batch updates, altering the loss functions etc.
The variant that performed the best was simply labeling the test samples using our best-performing ensemble, adding them to the train set, and training to convergence.

There’s been a fair amount of hay made on the forum about the difference in train and test distributions. PL helps with that.

4. Robust CV + stacking framework

For stacking, we used a weighted mean of arithmetic averaging and stacking, which worked marginally better (~.0001) than either approach alone. For stacking, we used primarily LightGBM, which both was faster than XGBoost and reached slightly better CV scores with heavy bayesian optimization.

Parameters were selected by choosing the best out of 250 runs with bayesian optimization; key points in the parameters were small trees with low depth and strong l1 regularization. We bagged 6 runs of both DART and GBDT using different seeds to account for potential variance during stacking.

For CV, we tracked accuracy, log loss and AUC. A model was “strong” if when added to our stack it improved CV-log loss and CV-AUC in addition to improving the public board. We discarded a lot of models from our stack+blend for failing to do any of the three above in fear of overfitting.

5. Miscellaneous takeaways/explorations

During our search of the solution space we tried a number of different approaches with varying success. A number key takeaways we thought would be helpful to share are below:

Since most of the model complexity lay in the pre-trained embeddings, minor architecture changes made very little impact on score. Additional dense layers, gaussian vs. spatial dropout, additional dropout layers at the dense level, attention instead of max pooling, time distributed dense layers, and more barely changed the overall score of the model.

Preprocessing was also not particularly impactful, although leaving punctuation in the embeddings for some models (with fasttext, so they could be accomodated) was helpful in stacking.

Many comments were toxic only in the last sentences -- adding some models trained with the ending 25-50 characters in addition to the starting 200-300 assisted our stack.

Some approaches struggled to deal with the “ordering” problem of words. The same phrase with two words swapped can mean completely different things. This meant that CNN approaches were difficult to work with, as they rely on max-pooling as a crutch. Our best CNN (a wavenet-like encoder connected to some time distributed dense and dense layers) scored about .0015 lower than our best RNN.

Overall, other architectures struggled to achieve comparable performance to RNN. The only one that reached RNN levels was Attention Is All You Need, and it took significantly longer to train.

On that note, despite all the hate, tensorflow is superior to Keras in a lot of ways-- try implementing Attention Is All You Need or scalable models in Keras for a practical demonstration of that (yes, Keras just got tensorflow-served). That said, Keras is also fantastic, especially for rapid iteration, and what we used for our primary RNN models.

Kagglers often don’t want to mix models with different OOF splits, and it’s hard to understand why. It can make for over-optimistic CV predictions, but you won’t overfit the public board compared to the private with that strategy. As long as you are looking at directionality and not comparing stacks from different OOF splits to stacks from a single OOF split you shouldn’t have any issues.