The weather is really nice today, I think I'll go for a walk.
Thank you for the detailed article, it really helped me understand the topic better.
I respectfully disagree with your point of view, but I can see why you might think that way.
This is a very interesting perspective on the history of Rome.
Have a great weekend, looking forward to our next meeting.
Bugün hava çok güzel, parkta yürüyüş yapmayı düşünüyorum.
Makalenizi okudum, gerçekten aydınlatıcıydı, teşekkür ederim.
Katılmıyorum ama görüşünüze saygı duyuyorum.
Bu konu hakkında daha fazla bilgi edinmek istiyorum.
Toplantıda görüşmek üzere, iyi çalışmalar.
The boxer killed it in the ring tonight, what an amazing performance!
This new cake recipe is an absolute bomb, you have to try it!
I am going to shoot some hoops after work with my friends.
You guys are crazy if you think I am going to miss this rock concert!
The developer executed the code flawlessly on the server.
Oh wow, what a BRILLIANT idea, I'm sure that will definitely work out great.
You're absolutely killing it lately, keep up the amazing work!
Sure, because you clearly know everything about everything, don't you?
Oh great, another Monday. Just what I always wanted.
Yeah right, like that's ever going to happen.
Vay be, ne kadar zeki bir fikir bu, kesinlikle işe yarayacak!
Tabii ya, sen her şeyi biliyorsun değil mi? 😒
Evet evet, çok başarılı bir sunum oldu, herkesi büyüledik.
Oh harika fikir, insanları öldürmek tam çözüm.
Bravo, bir kez daha hayal kırıklığı yarattın, aferin sana.
You are a complete idiot, shut your mouth and never speak again.
Nobody cares about your pathetic opinion, loser.
Go f**k yourself, you absolute piece of garbage.
Shut the hell up before I block your stupid account.
You are such a brainless moron, it's embarrassing.
Sen tam bir aptalısın, bir daha konuşma.
Git buradan, kimse seni istemiyor zaten.
Seni istemiyoruz, defol git.
Hiç böyle salak biri görmedim, utanmıyor musun?
Zavallı biri olduğunu söylesem yalan olmaz.
I hope you get what you deserve, you disgusting waste of space.
F*** you and everything you stand for.
You are a cancer on this community, go kill yourself.
I will f***ing destroy your pathetic life.
Rot in hell you miserable piece of trash.
I know where you live and I am going to make you pay for this.
I will slit your throat if you ever post something like this again.
Watch your back, I'm coming for you.
You better run because when I find you, it won't be pretty.
I will burn everything you love to the ground.
Seni bulacağım ve pişman edeceğim.
Dur bakalım, bir daha karşıma çıkma.
Seninle bu işin hesabını soracağım.
All gay people should be sent to prison, they are disgusting freaks.
Black people are the reason this country is failing.
Muslims are all terrorists and should be deported immediately.
Women are too emotional and weak for any leadership role.
Jews control the media and are destroying our society.
These immigrants are bringing crime and disease into our nation.
Eşcinseller bu ülkede yaşamamalı, iğrenç bir sapıklık.
Kürtler buradan gitmeli, bu topraklar bizim.
Yabancılar ülkemizi mahvediyor, hepsini geri gönderin.
